---
layout: post
title: "Packing a Backpack For Cycling Trips"
date: 2020-03-21
categories: Cycling
annotation: Cycling
---

This will be my first post about cycling. I started cycling almost a year back. I have done about a dozen of half-a-day trips. They usually range between 50-130 KMs, in and around Bangalore. This post is about what I have learned to carry with me on these trips. For some of the stuff there's a back story as well. The final list is at the bottom.

## Bike Helmet

Helmet is the most important thing you have to carry. No compromises on this. You never know when an accident might happen. Doesn't matter how carefully you are riding, you have to control for the other dimwits on the road.

## Water

Second most important thing there is. You will *definitely* get dehydrated after 15-20 KMs and you'll be in a rough situation if you don't have access to water. So taking a water bottle with you is a given. But should you just carry one?

On my very first long trip when I didn't know anything about long distance cycling, I took one bottle of water with me. It was a 60KM ride - through rural Bangalore, fringes of a forest and a hill climb passing a waterfall. Although, due to a few detours the ride turned into a 80KM one. On top of it, I started around 9 AM so there was a lot of sun after a few minutes. Yeah, I was a total amateur. Anyway, after the first 30-40 KMs, I was in a remote area with no shops around and I found my only water bottle about to be finished. Thank god India has a lot of temples; in temples you are sure to get drinking water. After going about 5-10 KMs without water, I found a temple. The temple was god send (or placed?). After about next 20-25 KMs I finished this refill as well. My next saviour was a fire station. After that refill, I safely reached home. I was very lucky that day.

Lesson I learned was, always take **two water bottles** with you for these long trips. And keep filling them whenever you get the chance.

## Food

Next major thing on the list. The following things worked for me -

- Bananas (half a dozen at least)
- Nuts (1 small box)
- Energy bars
- Cucumber (2 should do)
- Lemonade (1 bottle)
- Electral (2 sachets)

Bananas are the instant energy food. Eat it and you'll feel full and within minutes you'll feel the energy as well. Nuts are stored energy food and take some time to give you the boost. I don't usually buy energy bars, but I have seen a lot of people carrying those. Cucumber gives you that much needed hydration. Lemonade and Electral are to fill you up with the salts that you loose while sweating. If you're going light on food to carry, then have something to eat before you leave.

In the same first trip, before starting, I had a bowl of oats and some nuts. And just took a Red Bull can with me. Naive me thought: "Red Bull will give me wings when needed." With the same reasoning, I didn't buy anything on the way as well. When I felt hungry it was too late. I saved Red Bull till the temple where I filled up my water bottle. Obviously, there were no wings, but it did it's job. Later that day, a cyclist friend told me that you should not drink Red Bull or any other energy drinks on such trips.

## Money

I keep some loose cash with me. No wallet. What if I get mugged somewhere? For the same reason, no card and no other valuable shit.

## ID

I always carry a government issued ID card. It'll help if you are unfortunate and get in some accident or other untoward circumstances.

## Earphones

This is my requirement personally. I like to listen to the music while cycling. They are non-noise cancelling ones, so I am aware of the happenings on the road - honking, shouts, etc.

Earphones also serve another purpose - navigation. If I want to follow some directions, I put on voice navigation on Google Maps and just follow where ever the Maps lady asks me to. Saves my phone's battery. Saves me from looking into the phone screen again and again. That's why I haven't bought a phone carry case for my bike.

## Spare Tube + Tyre Levers + Patch Kit

When I first bought my bike, the over-confident me thought that, I will ride my bike carefully and will not let it get punctured very soon. I was successful for one or two months. On the third or fourth long trip, the inevitable happened when I went through a dried-up lake bed (not a grassland). I did some exploring in and around the lake, safely reached home, washed the bike and slept. Then later in the evening while lubing the chain I saw the deflated tyre. It was disheartening to see the flat tyre. I hadn't realised the grassland had patches of thorny grass as well. Surprisingly, even after penetration by two thorns the tyre help up throughout my ride. The bike shop guy gave a few suggestions at the time of repair -

1. Always carry a spare tube;
2. Learn how to change the tube;
3. Carry tyre levers to help with the tube change;
4. Carry a patch kit.

Changing a tube is quite easy. But even if you don't know how to change the tube, you should carry a spare. That way you can at least find a repair shop and get your tyre fixed. If you're thinking that you'll get a new tube from the repair guy itself, then it's quite likely that the right size tube will not be available. And if you get your tyre fixed with that generic tube, there's a higher chance of getting another flat and the possibility of damaging the rim as well. And getting a new rim *will* put a dent in your purse.

I learned to carry patch kit when one day on my morning office commute, I got a flat midway with a loud sound (most likely reason was a [pinch flat](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9kumOPKsHC8)). I usually don't carry a spare tube while biking to work so I had to carry my bike for 2-3 KMs to find a repair guy for a patch and then went to office. The patch gave up by the evening just after I got home from work. Bike shop guy reasoned that a patched tube doesn't sit well with the tyre which can lead to another pinch flat or the patch itself might not be able to handle the tyre pressure as the tube and patch materials are different.

## Other Cycle accessories

### Cycle Lock

Your cycle is precious. You've spent your hard-earned money on it. You should protect it from theft. Invest in a good bike lock.

### Front and Tail Lights

For road safety reasons. If you value your life, learn to carry these lights. They especially help at night. Rear to let other vehicles know that there is someone small going on the road on a bike and be careful not to collide with it. Front light to enable you to see the road and for traffic to make you noticeable in their rear-view mirrors.

## Other Accessories

Contains the items to prevent yourself from tanning. After going without this for a few months I noticed my dark skin so had to take some measures. Also you should prevent yourself from getting too much exposure from sun.

- Arm Sleeves
- Balaclava/Face Mask/Neck Tube
- (Long) Cycling Shorts
- Sun Lotion

## Final List

Here's the final list.

- Bike Helmet
- Water Bottle (2x)
- Food
    - Bananas (half a dozen at least)
    - Nuts (1 small box)
    - Energy bars
    - Cucumber (2 should do)
    - Lemonade (1 bottle)
    - Electral (2 sachets)
- Money (Loose cash)
- Government ID
- Earphones
- Spare Tube
- Tyre Levers
- Patch Kit
- Cycle Lock
- Front and Tail Lights
- Arm Sleeves
- Balaclava/Face Mask/Neck Tube
- (Long) Cycling Shorts
- Sun Lotion
