---
layout: post
title: "Workation in Pondicherry"
date: "2022-04-28"
categories: city-hopping
---

### April 2022

**28th, 10:00 PM**
- Started for the bus boarding point.
- Bus was 15 minutes early. First time ever. Asked the cab driver to speed it up.

**28th, 10:30 PM**
- Boarded the bus. It started within a minute.
- Talked to mum and Prashansa on the bus.
- Slept at 12:20 AM.

**29th, 06:00 AM**
- Woke up.
- Watched the sunrise from the bus. The original plan was to go to the [Rock Beach](https://goo.gl/maps/vXFeqa9JpENj5bGU9) from Pondicherry bus stand and watch the sun rise.
- Pinged a few friends about my arrival.
- I got worried when the driver took a different route. He later converged on the correct route.

**29th, 07:30 AM**
- State bus for Auroville beach. Rs. 12 ticket. Empty seat.
- Feeling the heat a bit.

**29th, 08:00 AM**
- Walked to [Vagabond](https://goo.gl/maps/69tmUS8LN1iTwvwJA) from bus stand.
- Sriram, the property manager, showed me to the top bunk bed on the ground floor.
- Met Saiprasanth and Santosh.
- Brushed my teeth and went to the terrace.
- Met two new people from Bengal/Odisha. They both have a recruiting company in Bangalore. They came 30 minutes before me. They had booked the Vagabond Airbnb.
- Felt hungry. Sriram suggested [Auroville Bakery](https://goo.gl/maps/W9ueUPiDEG7mhiXW8).

**29th, 08:20 AM**
- Took one of the property bicycles to the bakery. Cycled ~2 KMs.
- Did not want to experiment. So ordered Idli and Red Rice Cheese Dosa. The dosa was not good. :/
- Breakfast was filling.
- Came back feeling super hot.

**29th, 09:20 AM**
- Met Tanusha and Anushka.
- Explored the property's garden and terrace.
- So many [Jackfruit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jackfruit) trees. A few mango trees as well.
- Worked on the Swiggy blog for a few minutes.
