---
layout: post
title:  "quote"
date:   2014-07-11
quote: y
---


- *I am so clever that sometimes I don't understand a single word of what I am saying.* **Oscar Wilde**

- *You know you're in love when you can't fall asleep because reality is finally better than your dreams.* **Dr. Seuss**

- *You've gotta dance like there's nobody watching,<br/>Love like you'll never be hurt,<br/>Sing like there's nobody listening,<br/>And live like it's heaven on earth.* **William W. Purkey**

- *In three words I can sum up everything I've learned about life: it goes on.* **Robert Frost**

- *I've learned that people will forget what you said, people will forget what you did, but people will never forget how you made them feel.* **Maya Angelou**

- *Twenty years from now you will be more disappointed by the things that you didn't do than by the ones you did do. So throw off the bowlines. Sail away from the safe harbor. Catch the trade winds in your sails. Explore. Dream. Discover.* **H. Jackson Brown Jr.**

- *We have to dare to be ourselves, however frightening or strange that self may prove to be.* **May Sarton**

- *A human being is a part of the whole called by us universe, a part limited in time and space. He experiences himself, his thoughts and feeling as something separated from the rest, a kind of optical delusion of his consciousness. This delusion is a kind of prison for us, restricting us to our personal desires and to affection for a few persons nearest to us. Our task must be to free ourselves from this prison by widening our circle of compassion to embrace all living creatures and the whole of nature in its beauty.* **Albert Einstein**

- *We are all atheists about most of the gods that humanity has ever believed in. Some of us just go one god further.* **Richard Dawkins**

- *A life spent making mistakes is not only more honorable, but more useful than a life spent doing nothing.* **George Bernard Shaw**

- *Every child is an artist. The problem is how to remain an artist once he grows up.* **Pablo Picasso**

- *You must have chaos within you to give birth to a dancing star.* **Friedrich Nietzsche**

- *It is good to love many things, for therein lies the true strength, and whosoever loves much performs much, and can accomplish much, and what is done in love is well done.* **Vincent Van Gogh**

- *If you ask me what I came to do in this world, I, an artist, will answer you: I am here to live out loud.* **Émile Zola**

- *If you want to really hurt your parents, and you don't have the nerve to be gay, the least you can do is go into the arts. I'm not kidding. The arts are not a way to make a living. They are a very human way of making life more bearable. Practicing an art, no matter how well or badly, is a way to make your soul grow, for heaven's sake. Sing in the shower. Dance to the radio. Tell stories. Write a poem to a friend, even a lousy poem. Do it as well as you possible can. You will get an enormous reward. You will have created something.* **Kurt Vonnegut**

- *Don't cry because it's over, smile because it happened.* **Dr. Seuss **

- *Do not pity the dead, Harry. Pity the living, and, above all those who live without love.* **J.K. Rowling**

- *The saddest aspect of life right now is that science gathers knowledge faster than society gathers wisdom.* **Isaac Asimov**

- *If we knew what it was we were doing, it would not be called research, would it?* **Albert Einstein**

- *The fact that we live at the bottom of a deep gravity well, on the surface of a gas covered planet going around a nuclear fireball 90 million miles away and think this to be normal is obviously some indication of how skewed our perspective tends to be.* **Douglas Adams**

- *Nobody ever figures out what life is all about, and it doesn't matter. Explore the world. Nearly everything is really interesting if you go into it deeply enough.* **Richard P. Feynman**

- *Study hard what interests you the most in the most undisciplined, irreverent and original manner possible.* **Richard P. Feynman**

- *Physics is like sex: sure, it may give some practical results, but that's not why we do it.* **Richard P. Feynmann**

- *We sit silently and watch the world around us. This has taken a lifetime to learn. It seems only the old are able to sit next to one another and not say anything and still feel content. The young, brash and impatient, must always break the silence. It is a waste, for silence is pure. Silence is holy. It draws people together because only those who are comfortable with each other can sit without speaking. This is the great paradox.* **Nicholas Sparks**

- *So avoid using the word ‘very’ because it’s lazy. A man is not very tired, he is exhausted. Don’t use very sad, use morose. Language was invented for one reason, boys - to woo women - and, in that endeavor, laziness will not do. It also won’t do in your essays.* **N.H. Kleinbaum**

- *Eleanor was right. She never looked nice. She looked like art, and art wasn't supposed to look nice; it was supposed to make you feel something*.**Rainbow Rowell**

- *Everyone sees what you appear to be, few experience what you really are.* **Niccolò Machiavelli**

- *There is no other way to guard yourself against flattery than by making men understand that telling you the truth will not offend you.* **Niccolò Machiavelli**

- *The lion cannot protect himself from traps, and the fox cannot defend himself from wolves. One must therefore be a fox to recognize traps, and a lion to frighten wolves.* **Niccolò Machiavelli**

- *The first method for estimating the intelligence of a ruler is to look at the men he has around him.* **Niccolò Machiavelli**

- *...learn this lesson, that to be self-contented is to be vile and ignorant, and that to aspire is better than to be blindly and impotently happy..* **Edwin A. Abbott**

- *The painter pondered the mournful puzzle of life demanding to be born and, once born, demanding to be fruitful ... to multiply and to live as long as possible—to do all that on a very small planet that would have to last forever.* **Kurt Vonnegut**

- *Experience is what you get when you didn't get what you wanted. And experience is often the most valuable thing you have to offer.* **Randy Pausch**

- *The key question to keep asking is, Are you spending your time on the right things? Because time is all you have.* **Randy Pausch**

- *No matter how bad things are, you can always make things worse.* **Randy Pausch**

- *Look, I'm going to find a way to be happy, and I'd really love to be happy with you, but if I can't be happy with you, then I'll find a way to be happy without you.* **Randy Pausch**

- *Showing gratitude is one of the simplest yet most powerful things humans can do for each other.* **Randy Pausch**

- *When we're connected to others, we become better people.* **Randy Pausch**

- *Find the best in everybody. Just keep waiting no matter how long it takes. No one is all evil. Everybody has a good side, just keep waiting, it will come out.* **Randy Pausch**

- *I've been homesick for countries I've never been, and longed to be where I couldn't be.* **John Cheever**

- *Whenever you find yourself on the side of the majority, it is time to pause and reflect.* **Mark Twain**

- *Go to heaven for the climate and hell for the company.* **Mark Twain**

- *Keep away from people who try to belittle your ambitions. Small people always do that, but the really great make you feel that you, too, can become great.* **Mark Twain**

- *In a good bookroom you feel in some mysterious way that you are absorbing the wisdom contained in all the books through your skin, without even opening them*.**Mark Twain**

- *Substitute 'damn' every time you're inclined to write 'very;' your editor will delete it and the writing will be just as it should be.* Mark Twain**

- *Wrinkles should merely indicate where the smiles have been.* **Mark Twain**

- *The difference between the right word and the almost right word is the difference between lightning and a lightning bug.* **Mark Twain**

- *Books are for people who wish they were somewhere else.* **Mark Twain**

- *What would men be without women? Scarce, sir...mighty scarce.* **Mark Twain**

- *When I was a boy of 14, my father was so ignorant I could hardly stand to have the old man around. But when I got to be 21, I was astonished at how much the old man had learned in seven years.* **Mark Twain**

- *The more the heart is nourished with happiness, the more it is insatiable.* **Gabrielle Roy**

- *As soon as you realize everything's a joke, being the comedian is the only thing that makes sense...* **Alan Moore**

- *In the end we retain from our studies only that which we practically apply.* **Johann Wolfgang Von Goethe.**

- *Few are those who see with their own eyes and feel with their own hearts.* **Albert Einstein**

- *Never give up on what you really want to do. The person with big dreams is more powerful than one with all the facts.* **Albert Einstein**

- *Don't wait for miracles, your whole life is a miracle.* **Albert Einstein**

- *There exists a class of men who are so good at planning that they forgot the main idea. A good plan is one, which can be executed. If not, its  nothing more than a bed time story.* **Chanakya Niti**

- *I've had a lot of worries in my life, most of which never happened.* **Mark Twain**

- *If no mistake have you made, yet losing you are ... a different game you should play.* **Yoda**

- *Would the boy you were, be proud of the man you are?* **Anonymous**

- *And those who were seen dancing were thought to be insane by those who could not hear the music.* **Friedrich Nietzsche**

- *You just have to believe it’s special to make it special.* **Kungfu Panda**