---
layout: post
title: "Avoiding ML Tech-Debt"
date: 2021-12-04
categories: MLOps
---

Today, I am going to discuss how to avoid the ML Tech Debt. Data Scientists do a variety of things. And, model deployment is not the last step. After deployment comes the AB experiment, monitoring, 100% roll-out, system scale-up, model drift, etc etc. Of course, many of these things are done by engineering or platform team or MLEs, but the Data Scientists are involved nonetheless.

In this post, I will discuss the measures that you can take as a Data Scientist to avoid the pitfalls that may come.


## Model documentation

This one will sound obvious, but it is super important. Maintain the model documentation. Whether it's a README file in your model repo or a page on confluence. It needs to be in a place accessible/searchable by you, your team members, and future team members. You should document at least these things:

- model name
- owner(s)
- model endpoint urls
- sample curl
- contract: payload and response
- features used
- online/offline
- deployment date
- stakeholders
- consumers
-

You'd be surprised to know how often things are not documented. By documenting it you can avoid a lot of pitfalls. I will list some of them here.

It is very difficult to track where a model is being used and why. It is especially difficult if all the stakeholders who could have answered these questions have left the company.



### Corollary: System Flow Documentation

In addition to the model documentation, maintaining the system flow documentation also helps. How systems were working together changed the order of migration for us which we had to figure out along the way.


## Cleaning-up after AB experiments

Always clean-up after an AB experiment. This includes cloned collections, BCL rules, deployed models, deployed features and the corresponding topics.


## Awareness of POCs

Be aware of all the POCs involved for a model from all the involved teams. In our case we needed to know relevant POCs from DS, Product, Merch, Merch Ops, and DSP.


## Stay away from hardcoding things

Avoid hardcoding things in your engineering systems. There was a situation where we had done all the config changes to complete the migration, but we were still seeing the traffic on our dashboard. Turns out, one config was hard coded in the code.


## Migration in piecemeal manner

Always migrate in a piecemeal manner. It is going to slow things down, but it's okay. When migrating two RYL models, due to how the Merch systems are built, one model failed to migrate. We reverted after 10-15 minutes, but our impact radius was extremely small as it was live in a few low traffic cities. (FYI: impacted customers who were supposed to see RYL would have seen TPFY)
