---
layout: post
title: "Don't Worry, Be Hampi 📍"
date: "2023-01-27"
categories: Travel
---

Hampi Ruins. Temples. Boulders. River. Hippies. History.

### Reaching Hampi

Reaching Hampi from Belagavi was not a simple affair. There is no direct way to Hampi; may be that's why it is preserved this much. Take a bus from Belagavi to Hospet ([KSRTC]() is the best option). This bus dropped me at 4:30 in Hospet. I had to wait for an hour for the bus to Hampi for a 20 min journey. The bus dropped me at around 6:00 AM. Had chai.

Hampi is divided into two parts by the Tungabhadra River: North and South. You can't take rented scootys from one part to the other.

[map]

Went to the ferry point. Waited for ferry till 8:00 AM. Took the ferry for 50 bucks. Took the auto the a fellow hosteler.

Till my ferry came, I observed what people were doing. Baths. Potty.

Beautiful sunrise.

Full of boulders.

I researched a few Sunrise and Sunset points.

I reached Hampi on Friday. After wrapping up from work, made new friends at the Hostel.

### New Friends

Let's call the first group the Hyderabadis: Nagendra, Ravi, Yogendra, and Akshita. We shared the same dorm. The first three are from Hyderabad and Akshita is from Belagavi. (She agreed with my observations on Belagavi.) We live in a [small world](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Six_degrees_of_separation). They went on a trek and found out that they know each other through Ravi. And that's how they started traveling together.

The second group (in the order I met them): Adele, Lucian, Oscar, Mikal, Laura, and Elliot. Adele and I came together from the ferry drop point. This group had representation from Italy, Netherlands, UK, and Portugal. We all met each other in the common area of the Hostel.

**Game time.** During my dinner with the Hyderabadis that night, we played the "QRST game". Rules are as follows: one person starts with a random word. The next person (clockwise or anti-clockwise) has to give a word that is related to the previous word. If you can think of a relationship between the words then it is a valid word. The only rule is that your word should not start with Q, R, S, or T. Otherwise, the round ends there. This is also a good drinking game. This game brings out fun facts about the players. You can make rounds funny, dirty, technical, or anything you want. We had lotsa fun while playing it.

### Life of Foreigners in India

The Saturday morning I decided to go for the Hampi tour with non-desi friends. We got an auto for ₹500 per head for the complete tour with pick-up and drop points at the Hostel.

[tour map]

[bull]

[city view]

[matanga hill]

[Hampi Bazaar]

On our way down from the Hill, we saw a big family having their lunch. They were from a village near [Shimoga](). They had brought their own food: jowar roti, 3 dishes, 2-3 varieties of podi, curd rice balls, and dessert made of millets and daliya. The most authentic North Karnataka food you can have. This family offered us food and two people from our group jumped on the opportunity. One by one all of us enjoyed their generosity. The food was delish. Everyone then clicked selfies with each other. I said dhanayawad in kannada to everyone and left.

After our lunch we started towards the Virupaksha Temple. There were two festivals this weekend: Pongal and Sakranti. The road to the temple was full of people from nearby villages.


people clicking selfies with

[Temple]

[Chariot temple]

[Sunset]

In the evening, we went for drinks at the cliff jumping point at the Sanapura lake. (I would jump from this rock 2 days later.) It was completely dark and had quite an amazing view of the night sky. Then we went to a cafe near the hostel, had dinner and danced our asses off.

### Meals

Hostel food was not pocket friendly and they did not have the local cuisine. I hadn't explored the local food in Hampi yet and was just having it at different cafes here in Hampi.

The hydrabadi friends took me to a bf place serving fresh idlis and dosas.

[bf]

During lunch I went to a fish restaurants.

[lunch]

Later during the week I found a new place - hotel rajaram. Serves BF, Lunch and Dinner. Everything is cooked right in front of me and it's all South Indian food.

### The Hostel

A single hostel in the whole Hampi. Rambo's. 700 bucks a night. Okayish dorms. My first hostel where there were more foreigners than Indians. According to these people, I will find similar places in Goa and Himachal.

This place is a guest house masquerading as a hostel. It is also a restaurant. After realising the nature of this place, very people stay at the dorms.

This place has a few redeeming points.

#### Sanapura lake

[lake]
[cliff jumping point]
[night shots]

podcasts and vitamin d.

- Because of how this place is mostly empty, the common area is always quiet. It is quite a good place to work at.


### Workation

Sad reality of working at Hostels: everyone around you is chilling and you are working or attending meetings. Advantage is that you develop the skill of not caring about the environment around you.

The common area is open and quiet.


And tried to visit them during the week before or after work.
Saw 1 sunrise and 1 sunset during the week.


### Sunrises and Sunsets


[pics]

### The Second Hampi Tour

The next weekend came. Two new guys studying in Pune reached Hampi. Both were into History. We went on another tour with them in the same auto. This time we also covered the things I couldn't do the last time.

chariot temple and the ₹50 note

[rajnavami place] - where the king used to sit.

[queens bath]

Sunset at the Matanga hill

bhaang lassi

Apparently, if you add "special" to iconic things at places like this you will get the same item but spiked with some drug.

### Anegundi Craft Tourism Village

Next Sunday, I visited Anegundi. It was 7 KMs to the hostel so I just walked the whole duration.

chariot
hawa mahal
Kishkinda trust
ukish the shop

Anegundi Fort

temple in the cave

dream catchers

### Hippie Island

temple
tungbhadra river
another sunset


### The Bikers

3 people. We went to a cafe - Island Vibes.

### The Hampi Festival



